1019594
research-article2021

AUT0010.1177/13623613211019594AutismPickard et al.

Original Article

Participatory autism research:
Early career and established
researchers’ views and experiences

Autism
2022, Vol. 26(1) 75­–87
© The Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/13623613211019594
DOI:
10.1177/13623613211019594
journals.sagepub.com/home/aut

Hannah Pickard1, Elizabeth Pellicano2 ,
Jacquiline den Houting2,3 and Laura Crane4

Abstract
Despite more autism research taking place than ever before, there is a disconnect between the current landscape of autism
research and what autistic people and their allies want from research. While participatory research has been proposed as
a potential solution, we know little about how researchers (particularly, early career researchers) employ this approach.
We interviewed 25 researchers (14 early career and 11 established researchers) about their views and experiences of
participatory autism research. Through reflexive thematic analysis of interview and focus group data, we identified three
themes. First, our participants emphasised the flexible nature of participatory research, and the many forms it can take; yet
noted that this flexibility could cause confusion. Second, our participants highlighted the importance of building relationships
with research partners, while commenting on the challenges around effective communication and working with diverse
groups of people who may have limited research experience. Finally, participants described the challenges of working within
academic environments that are not conducive to participatory research (e.g. due to limited time, funding and support). We
discuss these issues with regard to changes required at both an individual and systemic level, ensuring that efforts are made
to meaningfully involve autistic people and their allies in all stages of the research process.
Lay abstract
‘Participatory autism research’ refers to ways of involving autistic people and their allies (e.g. family members) in making
decisions about research. These decisions can include what research gets done, how it gets done and how research findings
are used. While there is more and more interest in participatory autism research, we know little about how researchers
at different stages of their careers use this approach. To find out more, we discussed these issues with 25 researchers.
Fourteen of these were at an early stage of their careers, and 11 were more senior researchers. We spoke to people in
individual interviews or in groups. We then used a technique called thematic analysis to analyse our data, which involved
us looking for common topics or ‘themes’ discussed by our participants. What did we find? Our participants told us that
participatory autism research was a flexible approach, meaning that autistic people can be involved in research in many
different ways. While people viewed this flexibility in a positive way, it also caused some confusion about what does or does
not ‘count’ as participatory research. Our participants also spoke about how important it was to build relationships with
those involved in their research, but they also said it could be difficult to communicate well with diverse groups of people
who may not have much experience of research. Finally, our participants said it was hard to do participatory research when
there was not much time, funding or support available to researchers. In this article, we discuss these findings, focusing on
what needs to change to ensure that autistic people and their allies are meaningfully involved in autism research.
Keywords
autism, co-production, early career, engagement, participatory research, researchers

1

King’s College London, UK
Macquarie University, Australia
3
Cooperative Research Centre for Living with Autism, Australia
4
University College London, UK
2

Corresponding author:
Laura Crane, Centre for Research in Autism and Education (CRAE),
UCL Institute of Education, University College London, London
WC1H 0NU, UK.
Email: L.Crane@ucl.ac.uk

76
Over the past few decades, an increasing amount of autism
research has been funded and published (Goldstein et al.,
2015; Office of Autism Research Coordination, National
Institute of Mental Health, on behalf of the Interagency
Autism Coordinating Committee, 2019; Pellicano et al.,
(2014a, 2014b)). Despite the opportunities that this may
bring to autistic people and their allies, there is a striking
disconnect between the research being conducted and the
research that the community wants to see conducted (den
Houting & Pellicano, 2019; Pellicano et al., (2014a,
2014b)). Consequently, autistic people and their allies have
– quite rightly – been critical of autism research: research
tends to be guided by the interests of researchers and
funders rather than autistic people and their allies (Cusack
& Sterry, 2016), and there is often a lack of involvement
from autistic people in the research process (Pellicano
et al.,, 2014b). With increasing calls for autistic people to
be ‘at the centre of the autism conversation’ (Ne’eman,
2011), participatory research has been proposed as one
potential solution (Chown et al., 2017; Fletcher-Watson
et al., 2018; Nicolaidis et al., 2011; Parsons et al., 2013;
Pellicano & Stears, 2011; Raymaker & Nicolaidis, 2013).
Participatory research refers to ‘incorporating the views
of autistic people and their allies about what research gets
done, how it is done and how it is implemented’ (FletcherWatson et al., 2018, p. 1). A key principle of participatory
research is an acknowledgement of the power imbalance
between researchers and community partners (Gaventa &
Cornwall, 2008; Nelson & Wright, 1995). As conceptualised in Arnstein’s (1969) ladder of participation, power
varies across different types of participation: from no
power (e.g. therapy), through tokenism (e.g. consultation),
to shared power (e.g. partnership). A move towards levelling the power balance in research has been evidenced by
increasing interest in approaches such as citizen science,
crowdsourcing, co-production, participant-led research
and community-based participatory research (Wallerstein
et al., 2017; Woolley et al., 2016). Irrespective of the specific terminology used, or specific methodological
approaches taken, participation – beyond being a research
participant – can take many forms, with the distribution of
power in the decision-making process being key (see also
Hickey, 2018; Tritter & McCallum, 2006).
Collaborative ways of working can improve the quality,
relevance and impact of resulting research (Forsythe et al.,
2019). Yet, as Redman et al., (2021) explain, there are several factors that can complicate attempts to adopt collaborative practices. First, they emphasise the individual,
context-dependent nature of sharing power in research, as
what works in one project may not work in another.
Second, they discuss the need for the development of trusting relationships, based on honesty and effective communication, for fostering genuine co-produced research.
Third, they highlight practical requirements such as equipping researchers with the necessary skills, but also ensuring that universities value and incentivise participatory

Autism 26(1)
practices. Finally, they call for greater investment to support the complex and long-term partnerships needed for
effective and genuine collaborative research (i.e. co-production, as opposed to faux production). With growing
interest in participatory research, Redman et al., explain
that participatory practices will likely evolve even further
over the next few years.
Despite participatory research having a long tradition in
other fields (e.g. Beresford & Croft, 1993; Kiernan, 1999;
Macaulay, 2017; Minkler & Wallerstein, 2011; Ottmann
et al., 2011), such practices have been slow to reach the
autism field. Pellicano and colleagues (2014a, 2014b)
sought to understand researcher and community members’
experiences of participation in research at three levels: dissemination (informing community members about
research), dialogue (consulting with community members
about research) and partnership (collaborating with community members as research partners). Their data revealed
that while researchers often reported efforts to engage
autistic people and their allies in research at different levels, this was not always perceived to be the case: participants felt that there were very few opportunities to engage
in research beyond dissemination and dialogue Pellicano
et al., (2014a, 2014b). Furthermore, all stakeholder groups
commented on how active research partnerships, whereby
decision-making power is shared between autistic and
research communities, were rare (Fletcher-Watson et al.,
2018; Pellicano et al., (2014a, 2014b)); when they do
occur, the details of such partnerships are rarely reported
in published articles (Jivraj et al., 2014).
To support autism researchers in making their work
more participatory, best practice guidelines have been proposed (Fletcher-Watson et al., 2018; Nicolaidis et al.,
2019; Pellicano et al., 2017) and several innovative participatory research projects (Crane et al., 2019; Nicolaidis
et al., 2013; Parsons et al., 2013; Pellicano et al., 2020;
Vincent, 2019) and partnerships (e.g. https://aaspire.org/,
https://participatoryautismresearch.wordpress.com/) have
been shared. Yet, participatory practices are not commonplace in autism research and criticisms levelled at this
approach may stem, at least in part, from a lack of familiarity with implementing these practices. For example,
researchers have reported that they are often apprehensive
about involving autistic people in research, expressing
concerns that it could either dilute the scientific rigour of
the research (see Pellicano et al., 2014b) or that it will only
involve ‘vocal minorities’ that do not speak for the community as a whole (see den Houting et al., 2021; FletcherWatson, 2017). These concerns have also been highlighted
outside the autism research field, along with broader challenges for researchers around managing relationships and
time investments (Oliver et al., 2019; Redman et al., 2021,
but also see Williams et al., 2020, for reflections).
Despite the various opportunities and challenges inherent in participatory research, to our knowledge, only two
other research studies (aside from Pellicano et al., 2014a,

Pickard et al.
discussed above) have specifically examined autism
researchers’ views regarding community participation in
research. den Houting et al., (2021) examined participatory research in the context of Australian research projects
funded by the Autism CRC (https://www.autismcrc.com.
au/). Using an online survey, they gathered quantitative
and qualitative data from 64 academic researchers and 15
community members, all with research experience.
Encouragingly, their sample of academic researchers was
overwhelmingly supportive of participatory research and
had positive experiences of employing participatory
research practices. Yet, the authors reported that the academic researchers lacked a genuine understanding of participatory research and held views that could obstruct the
implementation of successful participatory research (e.g.
with academic partners retaining power throughout the
research process). Furthermore, community partners discussed the limited opportunities for involvement in the
research process, which were largely confined to consulting on research projects (as opposed to, for example, collaborative partnerships). den Houting et al., (2021)
suggested that both academic and community partners
would benefit from further training to develop a better
understanding of participatory research, and to aid in the
implementation of participatory practices in autism
research.
In a related study, Hollin and Pearce (2019) interviewed
20 academics (seven postdoctoral researchers and 13
researchers with permanent academic positions, e.g. lecturers/professors) about their understanding and experiences of stakeholder and public engagement in autism
research. From these data, the researchers identified three
themes. First, participants felt that disagreements existed
between stakeholders in the autism field due to the heterogeneity of autism. This was thought to result in difficulties
generalising between different autistic voices, or from one
autistic voice to the broader community. Second, participants felt that conflicts arose between the research and
autistic communities due to the socio-communicative difficulties of autistic people, which they felt limited their
ability to form relationships with researchers. Third,
despite these challenges, participants recognised valuable
traits in autistic people that they felt could benefit research
(e.g. to enhance discussion of the social and ethical consequences of their findings). Taken together, the authors
called for greater efforts to promote dialogue and engagement between researchers and autistic people, calling for
autism-specific modes of engagement with research (e.g.
online spaces to promote discussions).
Both studies provide clues as to why the autism research
field has been slow to adopt participatory practices.
Specifically, researchers’ comments highlight the pathologising, deficit-based approach that has permeated autism
research for decades (see Fletcher-Watson & Happe, 2019,
for an overview). Even if implicitly, these attitudes may

77
result in difficulties perceiving autistic people as equal
partners who deserve shared power in the research process. This is further complicated by an apparent tension in
researchers’ responses. For example, researchers emphasised the need to diversify the pool of autistic people who
contribute to research studies, but also appeared to expect
all autistic stakeholders to provide consistent input and/or
reach consensus.
While these studies provide a helpful starting point,
they either focused on public engagement in a broad sense
(i.e. not participatory research specifically), only elicited
the views of certain subgroups of the research community
(e.g. established, but not early career, researchers), or used
methods that did not allow for more in-depth discussion to
be generated (e.g. an online survey rather than interviews).
The aim of the current research was to build on these existing studies by gathering views and experiences of participatory research from both early career and established
autism researchers, via in-depth interviews and focus
groups. Including both these groups enabled us to gain an
understanding of the challenges and opportunities participatory research poses across different career stages, to
examine areas of convergence and divergence. It also
allowed us to examine potential differences in how the
groups viewed and used participatory research, which was
important given that established researchers (ESRs) and
early career researchers (ECRs) may hold different levels
of power in the research process (e.g. with ESRs potentially holding more power than those earlier in their
careers) (Muhammad et al., 2015). Finally, it enabled us to
identify strategies for supporting participatory research,
tailored to specific career stages and needs. Our specific
aims were to determine (1) researchers’ views of participatory research and its perceived benefits and challenges; (2)
researchers’ experiences of participatory research, reflecting on any barriers and facilitators and (3) researchers’
support or training needs, particularly for those at an early
stage of their careers.

Methods
Participants
Two groups of participants were recruited: ECRs and
ESRs. A different recruitment strategy, and data collection
methodology, was used for each participant group. These
strategies were chosen based on our research teams’ experience as members of these groups. With regard to ESRs,
we felt that they would be less likely to volunteer for the
research without personal invitations, that it would be
challenging to coordinate the diaries of busy academics for
focus groups, and that participants might speak more
openly in individual interviews. Conversely, we felt that
ECRs might struggle to discuss participatory research in
individual interviews (since many potential participants

78
were likely to have relatively limited practical experience
of participatory research). We also felt that ECRs would be
forthcoming to more open calls for research participation
(as opposed to the need for individual invitations).
ECRs were eligible to take part if they: (1) worked
within the autism research field and (2) were less than
1 year into their first permanent academic position (fulltime equivalent). They were recruited via social media and
word-of-mouth. Fourteen ECRs (10 women and 4 men)
took part (mean (M) age = 31.21 years, standard deviation
(SD) = 7.59, range = 22–51 years). Eight were full-time
PhD students, three were postdoctoral researchers, two
were research assistants/administrators and one was a visiting lecturer.
ESRs (i.e. at least 1 year into a permanent academic
position) were recruited via email, with invitations sent
out to researchers in the United Kingdom at recognised
university institutions (see: https://www.gov.uk/) who
worked in the autism research field (identified by searching for academics who listed autism as a research interest). A total of 76 personal invitations were sent, along
with nine invitations to broader autism research groups.
We specifically requested participation from those with
participatory research experience. In total, 21 (29%) ESRs
expressed an interest in taking part (55 did not respond)
and 11 (14%) completed an interview (3 male, 8 female;
M age = 43.1 years, SD = 8.46, range = 30–56 years). Of
the ESRs, four were lecturers (equivalent to assistant professor), four were senior lecturers/readers (equivalent to
associate professor) and three were professors. ECRs
were largely based in/around London, whereas ESRs were
dispersed across the United Kingdom. Almost all participants reported being of White ethnic background (ECRs
93% and ESRs 100%). Two participants identified as
autistic (one ECR and one ESR).

Procedure
Ethical approval was obtained via the Research Ethics
Committee at UCL Institute of Education (REC991).
ECRs took part in one of two in-person focus groups
(n = 11) or a one-to-one interview (n = 3; one via video call,
one via phone and one in person). ESRs participated in a
one-to-one semi-structured interview over video call.
Focus groups were chosen as the most appropriate method
of data collection for ECRs to help facilitate discussion
among a group with potentially limited experience of participatory research. Individual interviews were used when
ECRs were keen to participate but unable to attend the
focus groups. Individual interviews were used for all
ESRs, as they were less able to come together for focus
groups and were anticipated to have in-depth participatory
research experiences to share. An ECR (H.P.) conducted
all focus groups and interviews, which ensured consistency and that the ECRs felt comfortable disclosing their

Autism 26(1)
views and experiences. Prior to the focus groups and interviews, all researchers completed a consent form and demographic questionnaire that elicited information about
gender identity, age, ethnicity and academic roles. During
the focus groups, the facilitator ensured that the group discussion remained on topic and provided intermittent summaries to the group, particularly to check the interpretation
of key discussion points. Focus groups ranged from 62 to
74 min (M = 68 min), while one-to-one interviews ranged
from 36 to 75 min (M = 53 min).

Materials
Focus group and interview schedules were created by three
members of the research team H.P., E.P. and L.C. based on
their own experiences as ECRs/ESRs (see Appendix 1).
ECR focus group schedules covered: (1) definitions and
views of participatory research; (2) the benefits and challenges of taking part in participatory research; (3) experiences of participatory research and any barriers faced and
(4) training and support needs. The interview schedules for
ECRs followed a similar overall format. For ESRs, interviews covered the following topics: (1) definitions and
views of participatory research; (2) a brief overview of
their experiences of participatory research; (3) in-depth
examples of participatory research and (4) advice for
ECRs. Both the focus group and individual interview
schedules followed a similar format. Specifically, a series
of primary (open-ended) questions were always asked, followed by secondary (open-ended) questions that were
used to probe on specific points where elaboration and/or
clarification was needed.

Community involvement
While one of the research team members identifies as an
autistic ECR, autistic community members from outside of
academia were not involved in producing this work.

Data analysis
Focus groups and interviews were analysed using reflective thematic analysis as described by Braun and Clarke
(2006, 2013, 2019). Analysis was led by one ECR (H.P.)
and one ESR (L.C.), neither of whom identify as autistic,
but both engage in and advocate for participatory autism
research practices. Analyses involved identifying semantic
meanings in the data set following an inductive approach,
whereby themes were generated in response to interview
data, rather than trying to accommodate data within predefined themes or research questions (Braun & Clarke,
2013). H.P. and L.C. recursively proceeded through Braun
and Clarke’s six stages of (1) familiarisation, (2) coding,
(3) generating themes, (4) reviewing themes, (5) defining
and naming themes and (6) writing up. Focus groups and

Pickard et al.

79

Figure 1. Participatory research views and experiences from ECRs and ESRs: themes and sub-themes.

interviews for ECRs were analysed together, as the same
schedule was used across both formats. Data from ECRs
and ESRs were coded separately. During the process of
data familiarisation and coding (i.e. stages 1 and 2), similarities were noted, so data from ECRs and ESRs were
merged prior to theme development (i.e. prior to stage 3).
While developing themes, we considered whether the findings applied to ECRs, ESRs or both. Themes were
reviewed (separated or merged where required) following
several detailed discussions with the other members of the
research team: J.d.H. (an autistic ECR) and E.P. (an ESR
who does not identify as autistic), both of whom engage in
and advocate for participatory research practices.
Following these discussions, the final themes and subthemes were confirmed.

Results
Three themes were identified from the interview and
focus group data: (1) the flexible nature of participatory
autism research, (2) building bridges is hard work and
(3) participatory research is undervalued in academia
(see Figure 1). Quotes from individual ECRs and ESRs
are indicated using numbers (1–9) and letters (A–K),
respectively.

Theme 1: the flexible nature of participatory
autism research
Sub-theme 1: autism research, practice and advocacy are shifting. Researchers emphasised the effectiveness of autistic
community members campaigning for their voices to be
heard in research: ‘I think [autistic] people feel a lot more
empowered because they’re able to get together in communities and, therefore, they’re able to have the confidence, maybe, to pose questions to the research community’
(ESR-C). Online platforms were seen as a particularly
powerful way for the autistic community to vocalise their
views in this regard: ‘through online channels, they are
something of a coherent group, there’s lots of communication going on about various issues that affect them’ (ECR8). Researchers reported that participatory research
practices were ‘massive at the moment’ (ESR-E); noting
that this was potentially ‘part of a broader autistic rights
movement, which is in itself part of a bigger socio-political agenda about expanding our definitions of civil rights
to include the disability movement’ (ESR-F).
Interest in participatory autism research was felt to have
emerged recently and gradually: ‘I think autism research
has been very slow, mostly because it’s been driven so
strongly by a medical model of disability rather than a

80

Autism 26(1)

social model, and, unsurprisingly, that has inhibited wider
participation at a much earlier stage’ (ESR-B). Yet,
researchers also commented on the slow uptake of participatory practices in autism research, relative to other
research fields:

to consult with community members regarding their preferred level of participation in research: ‘We can’t expect
or assume that people all want to be involved or lead
research . . . people want to be involved on their own
terms’ (ESR-B).

autism researchers think they have so many brilliant new
ideas but participatory research has been around for decades,
and I would say autism research has been exceptionally slow,
as it often is, in getting smart to stuff that’s going on with this.
(ESR-B)

Sub-theme 3: participatory research terminology is unclear.
While researchers acknowledged that participation is ‘a
very broad concept . . .’ (ESR-D), they discussed the lack
of clarity in commonly used definitions of participatory
autism research: ‘it’s one of those things that people
define in different ways, and the level of participation can
vary’ (ESR-J). Participants perceived the language commonly used to describe participatory autism research to be
vague or ill-defined: ‘words like “meaningful” and
“engagement” are not black or white terms’ (ESR-G). The
vague use of common terminology used to describe participatory research contributed towards a lack of confidence surrounding research practices, both from ECRs
and ESRs. As a potential solution, ECRs reported that
having ‘a standardised definition or guidelines for participatory research’ would be ‘really helpful’, since ‘I don’t
think I would know how to go about having a fully participatory study at this point’ (ECR-1); ‘a big challenge for
me was to think how can I start to do participatory
research’ (ECR-6).

Researchers added that ‘we’re very far away from any
sort of model of participatory research that is acceptable in
autism research’ (ECR-8).
Sub-theme 2: participatory research takes many forms.
Researchers discussed the need for research to include
some form of autistic involvement but had diverse views
regarding levels of involvement that were ‘appropriate’.
While some suggested that community members should be
‘fully involved, start to finish’ (ECR-5), others felt that the
level of involvement could ‘vary quite a lot from just having people involved as part of an expert group that might
be advising on the research, right through to autistic people defining research questions’ (ESR-J). Researchers
emphasised the need to tailor involvement to the specific
research project: ‘I don’t think it’s always appropriate that
an autistic person can decide the full research design of a
project design – I think that [participation] needs to be
individualised’ (ESR-J). Furthermore, researchers mentioned that community members having full control of a
research project was often not a viable option:
I know there’s a lot of debates and discussions about
participant-led research, where the participants actually take
control of the research . . . which is interesting, but I’m not
sure you can ever fully achieve that if you have an agenda,
and all research has an agenda. (ESR-D)

Flexibility was emphasised, noting that the level of
involvement should be driven by discussions with community members, rather than striving to meet arbitrary standards of what participatory autism research ‘should’ be:
I had at the beginning quite a dogmatic view of what
participatory research was and that it should be people who
engaged in all parts of the process etc. I think probably now
I’m a bit less dogmatic and I think it’s about being involved in
as much or as little as they want to be. (ESR-A)

Discussions regarding involvement were seen as essential on a study-by-study basis: ‘You can’t assume that
every project is going to be the same or that you can apply
the same things, you have to work that out with the people
that you’re working with’ (ESR-A). ‘Levels of participatory research’ (ECR-5) were emphasised, as was the need

Theme 2: building bridges is hard work
Sub-theme 1: relationships are key. Researchers discussed
how ‘you have to build bridges with other people’ (ECR7) to make connections, build trust and incorporate a range
of views into research. Yet, researchers highlighted the
‘costs’ of relationship building in terms of time:
if you want to do it properly, you have to invest time and
effort in working with these communities, and helping them,
and doing things with them that simply isn’t of benefit to you
in research terms, but actually builds a relationship and a
rapport, and getting to know them better. (ESR-D)

Despite the costs, relationship building was viewed as a
key component of participatory research:
that took a lot of work in terms of how we communicated to
how we enabled their participation, the things that they
wanted to bring to that, but at the heart of that was an
extremely powerful interpersonal connection or relationship
with people for whom participation had never been very
meaningful. (ESR-B)

Sub-theme 2: communication can be challenging. Researchers mentioned ‘the challenges surrounding the different
ways in which autistic and neurotypical people communicate’ (ECR-8) and how communication with autistic people requires experience:

Pickard et al.
communicating with autistic people is not the same as
communicating with people who are neurotypical; it’s a huge
spectrum condition, so you can’t have experience with, say,
three children who’ve got autism, and say that you know
autism, because you don’t! I think experience counts for
everything. (ESR-D)

Differences in communication styles were often
reported to lead to misinterpretations: ‘sometimes in discussions there can be a degree of heat to them, or what we
can perceive as heat when you’re reading on a computer
screen that isn’t actually there’ (ECR-8); ‘you often do find
that after about an hour of talking, you realise you are both
meaning the same thing! That is one of the challenges and
why things take so long’ (ESR-K).
Researchers discussed the challenges around communicating with audiences unfamiliar with research:
if you are involving people that have no experience of
research, then there is a massive language barrier to get over. . .
it can be very challenging to word things and present things in
a way that is accessible to people that have never come into
contact with academia. (ECR-7)

Researchers commented on the difficulty of getting the
balance right when deciding the amount of information to
communicate when working with people who may not
(yet) be research literate:
I don’t want to give someone only a partial picture of what the
project is going to be about or what the findings were or what
the methods are or what the psychological theory is but then
equally, if they’re not an expert, I can’t – it’s not fair to just
bombard them with a bunch of technical stuff, pages and
pages of writing. (ESR-F)

Researchers highlighted the need to meet the communication needs of everyone involved:
if you’re genuine about inclusion and participation that takes
a lot of time and that’s about making sure that we’re
communicating in a range of ways, communicating in the
right ways, taking time to step back and explain and to work
with people in different ways in order to have meaningful
engagement and input (ESR-B).

Broader benefits were also emphasised: ‘learning how
to communicate with autistic people better had sculpted
how I communicate with everybody, like with everybody
all the time’ (ECR-8).
Sub-theme 3: the need for diverse community stakeholders. Researchers commented on the need to look beyond
the ‘core group’ of autistic people who often contribute to
research, to find those who may have differing
perspectives:

81
The easy thing to do would be to just involve people that we
know . . . autistic people who we know have got quite a bit of
experience of participatory research. I think we need to look
to involve people who may find it difficult to participate, but
want to contribute, and want to be part of it. (ESR-J)

Yet, researchers commented on the challenge of eliciting too diverse a set of views from community stakeholders, expressing concerns about how this could impact on
decision-making processes in research: ‘people do have
different views and how do you then, as a team, decide on
how to move forward with those different views because
sometimes those views are absolutely diametrically
opposed to each other’ (ESR-B). Researchers also highlighted the barriers around connecting and representing the
views of people within the autistic community who may
not be as vocal and easy to reach:
Again, this is the problem with finding diversity, right? You’re
only seeing people who are willing to collaborate and do stuff,
which many people on the spectrum don’t want to do. So, how
do you find those people? Because you can’t just send an
email! You can’t just send a request, or an invite. That’s why
you need to be in the field meeting people. (ECR-9)

ECRs suggested that large organisations could help
support this process:
collaboration with organisations that have contact with lots of
different types of people that are on the spectrum would help,
because then you would know that you are getting a much
broader range of people that are taking part in it. (ECR-7)

Theme 3: participatory research is undervalued
in academia
Researchers noted the positive impact that participatory
practices can have within research: ‘reducing that gap
between what is being printed and what is actually helping
people, which is a very big gap at the moment’ (ECR-9).
They commented on the value of involvement at both a personal level: ‘The benefits to me personally, are constantly
learning and improving my understanding’ (ESR-I); and a
professional level: ‘By giving some control over to [autistic
people], you learn things that, if you had completely directed
the research yourself, you would never have got’ (ESR-D).
Researchers mentioned that participatory practices had direct
benefits on their research, providing insights that would not
otherwise have been realised. For example, they mentioned
that their research is held to a high standard, that it provided
opportunities for two-way learning, and that it was better
informed by the lived experience of the autistic community:
So of course our research is better informed by including a
wider range of views and we would hope therefore that

82

Autism 26(1)
whatever we’re doing is more aligned with and better suited
for meeting the needs of the people who are at the centre of
our research. (ESR-B)

Nonetheless, researchers noted several challenges that
make it difficult to co-produce research within academia.
The restrictions and demands of academia were discussed
as key barriers:
the academic context expects certain things from you, you
know, papers, grants, PhD supervision, teaching, you know,
they’re so essential to what you’re doing that trying to make
participatory research top of your personal to do list is very,
very hard. (ESR-F)

In addition, two challenges were noted by our ECRs
specifically. First, the absence of support from senior academics was reported as a key challenge for ECRs: ‘it can
be really hard to do [participatory research] if the more
senior people in your research group don’t value that, if
they don’t see it as a priority’ (ECR-3). Second, ECRs felt
that their lack of seniority within the research environment
often constrained their ability to employ participatory
research practices, particularly when their views did not
align with those of their broader research team: ‘I can
come in with all these good ideas, but if they’ve already
got the project well underway and it’s their idea, there’s
not much I can do’ (ECR-8) and ‘I don’t feel I have much
control over whether the research is participatory’
(ECR-2).
Time constraints inherent in pressurised academic contexts were seen as a significant challenge to conducting
participatory autism research: ‘[participatory research] is
hard work and it takes a lot of time, and from the research
perspective that’s time that isn’t necessarily valued in
terms of the things that progress your career’ (ECR-8).
Some ECRs felt that time constraints limited their ability
to involve autistic people and their allies during the early
stages of their research career:
while you’re doing a PhD there is a lot of pressure to do as
much as possible, produce as many results as possible, publish
as soon and often as possible and it doesn’t necessarily give
you the time to say, ‘I want to do a focus group1 or, I want to
spend a bit of time reflecting on people’s responses to the
study, before I write it up’ (ECR-3).

ESRs expressed similar views: ‘a challenge for us as
researchers in doing participatory research is that everything takes longer, so if you’re genuine about inclusion
and participation that takes a lot of time’ (ESR-B). Both
groups also commented on the lack of funding resources
available within academic structures to involve autistic
people and their allies in research:
how does someone like me get to be able to pay people for
their time properly, like get . . . little research assistant

contracts for somebody who might help out with stuff, and not
just be doing it on their own goodwill (ECR-8).

As an ECR, a lack of control was thought to contribute
towards funding constraints: ‘I think particularly with PhD
projects or if you’re a post-doc, projects where you’re
coming in and the funding has already been assigned . . .
There is no money built in to pay for people to come to a
focus group’ (ECR-3). Some researchers also feared it was
somewhat of a luxury, only accessible to those in certain
research groups or institutions: ‘I think it’s quite a privileged thing to be able to do participatory research’
(ESR-C).

Discussion
It is perhaps unsurprising that researchers who engage
with, or have an interest in, participatory research are
enthusiastic about such practices. Yet, conducting interviews and focus groups with researchers at different stages
of their careers presented a nuanced picture. Even though
researchers wanted to make their research participatory
and felt that these methods afforded benefits to their work,
researchers at all stages of their careers reported experiencing considerable challenges in incorporating meaningful participatory research practices within their work.
Specifically, we identified three themes relating to participatory autism research practices across both ECRs’ and
ESRs’ data. First, researchers emphasised the shift towards
a participatory research framework, which they perceived
to be largely driven by autistic advocacy and broader societal changes. However, they felt there was an inherent lack
of clarity around the terminology used to define participatory research, which led to confusion among ECRs in particular. Second, researchers identified tensions around key
features of participatory autism research. In one example,
they emphasised the importance of building bridges with
autistic people and their allies, but also commented on the
challenges around communication that could hinder such
relationships. In another example, researchers called for
greater diversity of community partners in research,
yet also highlighted the difficulties around incorporating
diverse views. Finally, researchers spoke about the challenges of working within an academic environment that
was not conducive to participatory research, emphasising
issues associated with time, funding and support. In what
follows, we discuss these findings with regard to existing
literature, while also highlighting crucial areas where
change is needed.
The researchers in this study expressed a range of
views around how autistic people could or should be
involved in research. Despite stressing the need for flexibility when conducting participatory research, ECRs also
expressed a need for clear guidance on what constituted
‘genuine’ participatory research. In line with den Houting
et al., (2021), we suggest more in-depth, ongoing training

Pickard et al.
on the underlying philosophy of participatory autism
research, with the recognition that ‘participatory experience is not simply a method or set of methodologies, it is
a mind-set and an attitude about people’ (Sanders, 2002,
p. 1). Teams with considerable experience in participatory
research have made available resources that address both
the philosophical underpinnings and real-world practicalities of participatory autism research (e.g. Nicolaidis
et al., 2019). There is, however, a paucity of such
resources, at least in the field of autism research, and
more examples of high-quality participatory research are
needed to guide those new to participatory research. One
means of addressing this issue may be to encourage more
explicit reporting of participatory practices in published
work (see Jivraj et al., 2014; Nicolaidis et al., 2019; Price
et al., 2018), as opposed to only reporting the outcomes of
the research. Importantly, these examples should not be
treated as templates for how participatory research projects must be conducted, since what works well in one
project may not work well in another (Pellicano & Stears,
2011; Redman et al., 2021). However, these examples
should serve as useful exemplars of how things could be
done, providing those new to participatory autism research
greater insight into the considerations and practicalities of
this kind of research.
In any training on or reporting of participatory research,
it is essential to highlight the power dynamics involved. It
was notable that discussions of power were lacking among
our sample of researchers, yet power is ‘one of the founding principles of participatory research’ (Rose, 2018, p.
765; see also Arnstein, 1969). This finding mirrors recent
work by den Houting et al., (2021), who surveyed academics and community members about participatory autism
research in Australia. Community members reported a
stark lack of power sharing throughout the research process and felt that researchers tended to remain in positions
of control. Taken together, these findings suggest that –
although there is an overall willingness to involve autistic
people in research – considerable efforts need to be made
to ensure that power sharing is genuine and not tokenistic
(Pellicano et al., 2014a), with training for researchers
needed to manage expectations around this (den Houting
et al., 2021).
One way that expectations around power can be managed is through open discussions between researchers and
community members. Yet, our participants highlighted
challenges around communication, noting that differences
in communication styles can often lead to misinterpretations, which can be time-consuming. This finding aligns
with the work of Hollin and Pearce (2019), whose interviews with academic researchers also identified communication difficulties as a major barrier to community
engagement in research. Our findings, however, diverge
from those of Hollin and Pearce’s, as our participants
tended to describe communication difficulties as arising
from differences between autistic and non-autistic people’s communication styles, whereas Hollin and Pearce’s

83
participants placed the onus squarely on community members. Milton (2012) has reframed long-standing notions of
an autistic deficit in social interaction within the Double
Empathy Problem. This theory emphasises the reciprocal
nature of communication highlighting that, although autistic people may lack insight into the social world of nonautistic people, the reverse is also true. Based on our
findings, the Double Empathy Problem may certainly be
evident in relation to participatory autism research. We
therefore suggest that researchers need to make efforts to
develop their interactional expertise and increase trust and
communication within research–community member
interactions, rather than expecting autistic people to change
to fit in with academic norms.
In this regard, our results can be contextualised within
the broader literature on ableism in academia (BottemaBeutel et al., 2021). Disabled scholars have long noted that
there is a push towards normalising and homogenising the
way in which academic research is conducted (see Brown
& Leigh, 2020, for discussion). This ableist bias may be
particularly pronounced within the field of autism research,
with deficit-focused accounts having driven autism
research and practice for decades (e.g. Fletcher-Watson &
Happe, 2019).
While the Double Empathy Problem and ableism in
academia are two potential explanations for our findings
regarding communication breakdowns within research
teams, communication breakdowns did not always seem
linked to differences in neurology. Rather, they appeared
to be associated with more fundamental challenges with
involving lay people in the research process, particularly
around their often-limited research literacy; challenges
also noted outside the autism field (e.g. Holland-Hart
et al., 2019). In any academic-community partnership,
whether participants are autistic or not, it is essential to
have ‘clear communication and . . . robust relationships’
(Common Cause Research, 2018). This may be a useful
focus of training for researchers and community members
prior to entering research partnerships.
Our participants expressed much uncertainty regarding
the amount of information they should share with autistic
community members; that is, striking the right balance
between giving the community enough information to be
able to contribute meaningfully, but not overburdening
them. Given that effective partnership is a two-way
endeavour, a greater focus on relationship building and
communication between researchers and community
members may help reduce uncertainties around information sharing. Furthermore, educational opportunities may
help to alleviate these uncertainties. In particular, training
programmes could aim to extend beyond individual projects and build broader capacity to support participatory
research, ensuring that researchers and community members are equipped with the skills needed to engage with
and participate in participatory research (e.g. Autism CRC;
https://www.autismcrc.com.au/sylvia-rodger-academy/
research-program).

84
Beyond communication barriers, our researchers raised
concerns regarding a perceived lack of diversity among the
autistic people who contributed to research, noting that a
‘core group’ of people were consistently involved. den
Houting et al., (2021), who observed the same phenomenon when surveying researchers in Australia, stressed the
need for researchers to move away from equating participatory involvement in research with mere research participation. Echoing this call, we advocate for a move towards
careful consideration of what each person brings to the
research team (i.e. why they have been selected in the first
place), and ensuring that people are involved in projects
because of their experiential expertise relevant to each
individual research study (Little et al., 2002). Indeed, this
process should not be alien to researchers given that academic partners are usually selected to be involved in projects based on their skills and expertise, rather than how
representative they are (Bozeman & Gaughan, 2011).
Arguably, the shift towards participatory research that
our participants identified is no longer optional, with community engagement increasingly being mandated by
funders and other organisations (e.g. National Institute
Health Research Involve; www.invo.org.uk). However,
our data suggest that academic researchers are not fully
prepared for this shift. For example, our participants
explained how the time investment needed for participatory research seemed incompatible with the demands of
academic life; a particular concern for ECRs (see also
Southby, 2017). While the efforts of researchers are
increasing, with academics across many fields recognising
and sharing the benefits of community engagement in
research (e.g. Israel et al., 1998), this shift needs to be
accompanied by systemic change to ensure that participatory practices can be accommodated within the current
research frameworks. This systemic change needs to
include recognition of the costs, time and other commitments inherent to participatory research, to ensure that
these practices are supported within academic structures.
Reflecting on the views of ECRs and ESRs, across focus
groups and interviews, there was considerable overlap.
Despite clear differences in their experiences of using participatory research practices, our findings suggested that, to
some extent, ESRs and ECRs noted similar challenges.
Support for participatory research (e.g. training in communication and relationship building) should therefore be
implemented for researchers at all career stages. Greater
support for ECRs, however, is particularly essential. Our
sample of ECRs discussed several intrinsic barriers (e.g.
limited knowledge of how to implement participatory practices) and extrinsic barriers (e.g. a lack of support from senior academics and not being involved in high-level
decision-making) hindering their participatory research
efforts. We therefore call for better education and support
for ECRs by embedding participatory practices within the
culture of research and giving ECRs the necessary support
to make their work participatory (e.g. supporting ECRs to

Autism 26(1)
build wider community connections). While this requires
top-down directives, ECRs also need to start taking positive action, akin to the drive for reproducible research practices led by early career researchers in the United Kingdom.
In this regard, Orben (2019) notes,
We need all those who care about better research to stay
invested, and this will not happen by telling the next
generation of scientists to just sit back and hope. Early-career
researchers do not need to wait passively for coveted
improvements. We can create communities and push for
bottom-up change. (p. 465)

We advocate for the same approach to participatory
autism research.
While this study was one of the first to explore the
views and experiences of ECRs and ESRs with respect to
participatory autism research, it is not without its limitations. First, this study was advertised to those who had
been involved with (or, for ECRs, who had an interest in)
participatory autism research. Future research should elicit
the views of researchers who do not engage in participatory research to understand the reasons underlying this (i.e.
do they want to make their work more participatory or are
they unable to do so?). Second, while all researchers had
experience of and/or interest in participatory research, we
did not collect data on their level of community engagement (i.e. whether they were novices or experts, or how
successful their engagement had been). Also, we did not
define participatory research for our participants. Instead,
we encouraged participants to share the experiences that
they felt were participatory. Therefore, it was unclear
whether some experiences shared were genuinely participatory in nature. Third, our sample included researchers
only. As researcher and community perceptions of participatory research may diverge Pellicano et al., (2014a,
2014b), in future it will be important to triangulate these
data with community perceptions (den Houting et al.,
2021). Fourth, most of our participants were non-autistic
autism researchers. Further research may benefit from specifically examining autistic autism researchers’ experiences of participatory research, given their unique position
as both academics and members of the autistic community.
Fifth, our sampling strategy and data collection procedures
differed for ECRs and ESRs. We adopted different
approaches for pragmatic and ethical reasons, based on our
personal experiences of what would be most acceptable to
these groups; but these differing modes of data collection
may have impacted the information shared by researcher
groups (e.g. some ECRs may not have been comfortable
disclosing sensitive information in a group setting). All
focus groups and individual interviews were led by an
ECR to promote consistency in data collection. It is possible, however, that being interviewed by a more junior
researcher may have made it difficult for ESRs to disclose
their views and experiences, particularly negative ones.

Pickard et al.

85

Finally, this study is limited to researchers working in the
United Kingdom. While these findings do align with data
from Australia (e.g. den Houting et al., 2021), it is important for similar investigations to be undertaken across a
broader range of countries to examine any specific structural or cultural barriers affecting participatory practices
(Nicolaidis & Raymaker, 2015).
To conclude, interviewing ECRs and ESRs provided an
understanding of the challenges and the opportunities that
participatory autism research can afford. We call for greater
appreciation of the flexible nature of participatory research,
since ‘participation should be viewed as an expansive concept . . . any meaningful attempt to progress along a continuum of participation should be recognized and encouraged’
(Southby, 2017, p. 128). Participatory research hinges on
meaningful and trusting relationships with members of the
autism community; relationships that may take time to
develop but are essential for respectful autism research that
aligns with community priorities. Change cannot just be at
the level of individual researchers. Rather, we need broader
cultural and structural shifts to enable participatory practices
to become commonplace. Together, these efforts should foster a research culture that produces high-quality, well-funded
collaborative research that genuinely makes a difference to
the lives of autistic people and their allies.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article:
The research presented in this article was possible thanks to a
British Academy Rising Star Engagement Award, awarded to LC
(EN160135).

ORCID iDs
Elizabeth Pellicano

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7246-8003

Jacquiline den Houting

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9409-2035

Laura Crane

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4161-3490

Note
1.

In this example, focus groups were being discussed as a
way of consulting with the autistic community to discuss
research project findings and their relevance to autistic people’s lives.

References
Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. Journal
of the American Institute of Planners, 35(4), 216–224.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225
Beresford, P., & Croft, S. (1993). Citizen involvement: A practical guide for change. Macmillan.
Bottema-Beutel, K., Kapp, K. S., Lester, N. J., Sasson, J.
N., & Hand, N. B. (2021). Avoiding Ableist language:
Suggestions for autism researchers. Autism in Adulthood, 3,
18–29. https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2020.0014
Bozeman, B., & Gaughan, M. (2011). How do men and women differ in research collaborations? An analysis of the collaborative motives and strategies of academic researchers. Research

Policy, 40(10), 1393–1402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.
2011.07.002
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77–101.
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2013). Successful qualitative research:
A practical guide for beginners. SAGE.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2019). Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis. Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise
and Health, 11(4), 589–597. https://doi.org/10.1080/21596
76X.2019.1628806
Brown, N., & Leigh, J. (2020). Ableism in Academia: Theorising
experiences of disabilities and chronic illnesses in higher
education. UCL Press.
Chown, N., Robinson, J., Beardon, L., Downing, J., Hughes, L.,
Leatherland, J., Fox, K., Hickman, L., & MacGregor, D.
(2017). Improving research about us, with us: A draft framework for inclusive autism research. Disability & Society, 32(5),
720–734. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2017.1320273
Common Cause Research. (2018). Building Research
Collaborations between Universities and Black and
Minority Ethnic communities. https://cpb-eu-w2.wpmucdn.
com/blogs.bristol.ac.uk/dist/a/358/files/2018/09/CC_
Enablers_Barriers_final_sp-2c2f4bh.pdf
Crane, L., Adams, F., Harper, G., Welch, J., & Pellicano, E.
(2019). ‘Something needs to change’: Mental health experiences of young autistic adults in England. Autism, 23(2),
477–493. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361318757048
Cusack, J., & Sterry, R. (2016). Your questions: Shaping future
autism research. Autistica.
den Houting, J., Higgins, J., Isaacs, K., Mahony, J., & Pellicano,
E. (2021). ‘I’m not just a guinea pig’: Academic and community perceptions of participatory autism research. Autism,
25, 148–163.
den Houting, J., & Pellicano, E. (2019). A portfolio analysis of
autism research funding in Australia, 2008-2017. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 49(11), 4400–4408.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-04155-1
Fletcher-Watson, S. (2017, March 24). Autistic voices, and the
problem of the ‘vocal minority’.. http://dart.ed.ac.uk/vocalminority
Fletcher-Watson, S., Adams, J., Brook, K., Charman, T., Crane,
L., Cusack, J., Leekam, S., Milton, D., Parr, J. R., & Pellicano,
E. (2018). Making the future together: Shaping autism
research through meaningful participation. Autism, 23(4),
943–953. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361318786721
Fletcher-Watson, S., & Happe, F. (2019). Autism: A new introduction to psychological theory and current debate. Routledge.
Forsythe, L. P., Carman, K. L., Szydlowski, V., Fayish, L.,
Davidson, L., Hickam, D. H., . . . Anyanwu, C. U.
(2019). Patient engagement in research: Early findings
from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
Health Affairs, 38(3), 359–367. https://doi.org/10.1377/
hlthaff.2018.05067
Gaventa, J., & Cornwall, A. (2008). Power and knowledge. In
P. Reason & H. Bradbury (Eds.), The SAGE handbook
of action research (pp. 172–189). SAGE. https://doi.
org/10.4135/9781848607934
Goldstein, N. D., Tager-Flusberg, H., & Lee, B. K. (2015).
Mapping collaboration networks in the world of Autism
Research. Autism Research, 8(1), 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1002/aur.1393

86
Hickey, D. G. (2018). The potential for coproduction to add
value to research. Health Expectations, 21(4), 693–694.
https://doi.org/10.1111/hex.12821
Holland-Hart, D. M., Addis, S. M., Edwards, A., Kenkre, J. E., &
Wood, F. (2019). Coproduction and health: Public and clinicians’ perceptions of the barriers and facilitators. Health
Expectations, 22(1), 93–101. https://doi.org/10.1111/hex.
12834
Hollin, G., & Pearce, W. (2019). Autism scientists’ reflections on
the opportunities and challenges of public engagement: A
qualitative analysis. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 49(3), 809–818. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803018-3783-7
Israel, B. A., Schulz, A. J., Parker, E. A., & Becker, A. B. (1998).
Review of community-based research: Assessing partnership approaches to improve public health. Annual Review
of Public Health, 19, 173–202. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.publhealth.19.1.173
Jivraj, J., Sacrey, L. A., Newton, A., Nicholas, D., & Zwaigenbaum,
L. (2014). Assessing the influence of researcher-partner
involvement on the process and outcomes of participatory
research in autism spectrum disorder and neurodevelopmental disorders: A scoping review. Autism, 18(7), 782–
793. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361314539858
Kiernan, C. (1999). Participation in research by people with
learning disability: Origins and issues. British Journal
of Learning Disabilities, 27(2), 43–47. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1468-3156.1999.tb00084.x
Little, M., Jordens, C. F., Paul, K., Sayers, E. J., Cruickshank,
J. A., Stegeman, J., & Montgomery, K. (2002). Discourse
in different voices: Reconciling N = 1 and N = many.
Social Science & Medicine, 55(7), 1079–1087. https://doi.
org/10.1016/s0277-9536(01)00264-7
Macaulay, A. (2017). Participatory research: What is the history? Has the purpose changed? Family Practice, 34(3),
256–258.
Milton, D. E. (2012). On the ontological status of autism: The
‘double empathy problem’.. Disability & Society, 27(6),
883–887. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2012.710008
Minkler, M., & Wallerstein, N. (2011). Community-based participatory research for health: From process to outcomes.
Jossey-Bass.
Muhammad, M., Wallerstein, N., Sussman, A. L., Avila, M.,
Belone, L., & Duran, B. (2015). Reflections on researcher
identity and power: The impact of positionality on
Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR) processes and outcomes. Critical Sociology, 41(7–8), 1045–
1063. https://doi.org/10.1177/0896920513516025
Ne’eman, A. (2011). Question and answer interview. http://www.
talkaboutautism.org.uk/page/liveevents/arineeman.cfm
Nelson, N., & Wright, S. (1995). Power and participatory development: Theory and practice. ITDG Publishing.
Nicolaidis, C., & Raymaker, D. (2015). Community-based participatory research with communities defined by race, ethnicity, and disability: Translating theory to practice. In H.
Bradbury (Ed.), The SAGE handbook of action research
(pp. 167–178). SAGE.
Nicolaidis, C., Raymaker, D., Kapp, S. K., Baggs, A., Ashkenazy,
E., McDonald, K., Weiner, M., Maslak, J., Hunter, M., &
Joyce, A. (2019). The AASPIRE practice-based guidelines
for the inclusion of autistic adults in research as co-research-

Autism 26(1)
ers and study participants. Autism, 23(8), 2007–2019.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361319830523
Nicolaidis, C., Raymaker, D., McDonald, K., Dern, S.,
Ashkenazy, E., Boisclair, C., Robertson, S., & Baggs, A.
(2011). Collaboration strategies in nontraditional community-based participatory research partnerships: Lessons
from an academic−community partnership with autistic selfadvocates. Progress in Community Health Partnerships:
Research, Education, and Action, 5(2), 143–150. https://
doi.org/10.1353/cpr.2011.0022
Nicolaidis, C., Raymaker, D., McDonald, K., Dern, S., Boisclair,
W. C., Ashkenazy, E., & Baggs, A. (2013). Comparison of
healthcare experiences in autistic and non-autistic adults:
A cross-sectional online survey facilitated by an academiccommunity partnership. Journal of General Internal
Medicine, 28(6), 761–769. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606012-2262-7
Office of Autism Research Coordination, National Institute
of Mental Health, on behalf of the Interagency Autism
Coordinating Committee. (2019). 2016 IACC autism spectrum disorder research: Portfolio analysis report. https://
iacc.hhs.gov/publications/portfolio-analysis/2016/
Oliver, K., Kothari, A., & Mays, N. (2019). The dark side of
coproduction: Do the costs outweigh the benefits for health
research? Health Research Policy and Systems, 17(1),
Article 33. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12961-019-0432-3
Orben, A. (2019). A journal club to fix science. Nature, 573, 465.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-02842-8
Ottmann, G., Laragy, C., Allen, J., & Feldman, P. (2011).
Coproduction in practice: Participatory action research to
develop a model of community aged care. Systemic Practice
and Action Research, 24, 413–427. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11213-011-9192-x
Parsons, S., Charman, T., Faulkner, R., Ragan, J., Wallace, S.,
& Wittemeyer, K. (2013). Commentary – Bridging the
research and practice gap in autism: The importance of
creating research partnerships with schools. Autism, 17(3),
268–280. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361312472068
Pellicano, E., Crane, L., Gaudion, K., & the Shaping Autism
Research Team. (2017). Participatory autism research: A
starter pack. UCL Institute of Education.
Pellicano, E., Dinsmore, A., & Charman, T. (2014a). Views on
researcher-community engagement in autism research in
the United Kingdom: A mixed-methods study. PLOS ONE,
9(10), Article e109946. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0109946
Pellicano, E., Dinsmore, A., & Charman, T. (2014b). What
should autism research focus upon? Community views and
priorities from the United Kingdom. Autism, 18(7), 756–
770. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361314529627
Pellicano, E., Lawson, W., Hall, G., Mahony, J., Lilley, R.,
Davis, C., . . . Yudell, M. (2020). Documenting the untold
histories of late-diagnosed autistic adults: A qualitative study protocol using oral history methodology. BMJ
Open, 10, Article e037968. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2020-037968
Pellicano, E., & Stears, M. (2011). Bridging autism, science and
society: Moving towards an ethically-informed approach to
autism research. Autism Research, 4, 271–282.
Price, A., Schroter, S., Snow, R., Hicks, M., Harmston, R.,
Staniszewska, S., Parker, S., & Richards, T. (2018).

Pickard et al.
Frequency of reporting on patient and public involvement
(PPI) in research studies published in a general medical journal: A descriptive study. BMJ Open, 8(3), Article
e020452. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017-020452
Raymaker, D., & Nicolaidis, C. (2013). Participatory research
with autistic communities: Shifting the system. In J.
Davidson & M. Orsini (Eds.), Worlds of Autism: Across
the Spectrum of Neurological Difference (pp. 169–190).
University of Minnesota Press.
Redman, S., Greenhalgh, T., Adedokun, L., Staniszewska, S., &
Denegri, S. (2021). Co-production of knowledge: The future.
BMJ, 372, Article n434. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n434
Rose, D. (2018). Participatory research: real or imagined. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 53(8), 765–771.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127-018-1549-3
Sanders, E. B. N. (2002). From user-centred to participatory
design approaches. In J. Frascara (Ed.), Design and the
social sciences: Making connections (pp. 1–8). Taylor &
Francis.
Southby, K. (2017). Reflecting on (the challenge of) conducting participatory research as a research-degree student.
Research for All, 1(1), 128–142. https://doi.org/10.18546/
RFA.01.1.10
Tritter, Q. J., & McCallum, A. (2006). The snakes and ladders
of user involvement: Moving beyond Arnstein. Health
Policy, 76(2), 156–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2005.05.008
Vincent, J. (2019). It’s the fear of the unknown: Transition from
higher education for young autistic adults. Autism, 23(6),
1575–1585. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361318822498
Wallerstein, N., Duran, B., Oetzel, J., & Minkler, M. (2017).
Community-based participatory research for health (3rd
ed.). Jossey Bass.
Williams, O., Sarre, S., Papoulias, S., Knowles, S., Robert, G.,
Beresford, P., Rose, D., Carr, S., Kaur, M., & Palmer, V.
(2020). Lost in the shadows: Reflections on the dark side
of co-production. Health Research Policy and Systems,
18(1), Article 43. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12961-02000558-0
Woolley, J. P., McGowan, M. L., Teare, H. J. A., Coathup,
V., Fishman, J. R., Settersten, R. A., Sterckx, S., Kaye,
J., & Juengst, E. T. (2016). Citizen science or scientific
citizenship? Disentangling the uses of public engagement
rhetoric in national research initiatives. BMC Medical
Ethics, 17, Article 33. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12910016-0117-1

87
3.

What do you think are the benefits of doing participatory autism research?
4. What do you think are the challenges of doing participatory autism research?
5. Can you tell me a bit about your overall experiences,
if any, of taking part in participatory autism research?
We would like to hear about any good experiences,
as well as any not so good experiences.
6. Can anyone tell us about the barriers that prevent
you from doing participatory autism research?
7. Do you feel confident taking part in participatory
research?
8. Are there any areas of participatory research where
you do not feel as confident?
9. What do you think could be done to help build your
confidence?
10. For those of you who have taken part in participatory autism research, how did you go about involving the autism community in your research?
11. For those of you who have not taken part in participatory autism research, how would you go
about involving the autism community in your
research?
12. What training would you like to receive to help
support you with your participatory autism
research?
13. What support would you like to receive to help
with your participatory autism research?
Established researcher (individual) interview schedule
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

Appendix 1
Interview schedules
Early career researcher (focus group) interview schedule
1.
2.

First, I would like to start by asking you all, what
do you think the term ‘participatory research’
means?
It seems that we are hearing more and more about
participatory research with regard to autism –
would you all agree? Why do you think that is?

6.
7.
8.

Tell me a bit about yourself.
What does the term, ‘participatory research’, mean
to you? It seems that we are hearing more and more
about participatory research with regard to autism
– would you agree? Why do you think that is?
When did you first become involved in participatory autism research? Why did you decide to get
involved in participatory autism research?
What do you think are the overall benefits of taking
part in participatory autism research? What do you
think are the overall challenges of taking part in
participatory autism research?
Can you tell me a bit about your overall experience
of taking part in participatory autism research?
Tell me about a time when you were involved in a
participatory autism research project and it went
well?
Please can you tell me about a time when you had
an experience of taking part in a participatory
research project that did not go quite so well?
Do you have any advice for researchers, especially
those at the early stages of their career, who might
want to involve the autism community in their
research in a more meaningful way?

